## The HAL 100

This is a toy computer designed to make its running easy to follow,
with 100 words of main memory, 9 general-purpose registers, and 10
instructions. Here's a short example program in assembly language:

    ;; Comments start with semicolons.
            set     r9,,1           ;   r9 = 1;
    loop    getch   r1              ; loop: r1 = getchar();
            ifeq    r1,'X',done     ;   if (r1 == 'X') goto done;
            add     r9,,1           ;   r9 += 1;
            jump    ,,loop          ;   goto loop;
    done    halt                    ; done: exit(0);

The comments on the right give an almost-equivalent C program.

Every instruction takes three arguments. For example, 

            ifeq    r1,'X',done

with `r1`, `'X'`, and `done`, takes the value of register 1, compares it to 
the literal character `X`, and jumps to the instruction at `done` if they're
equal. On the other hand, in

            set     r9,,1

the second argument, left out, has a default of 0. (We'll see below
how a non-default value would affect this instruction.) In

            getch   r1

only the first argument is supplied. (`getch` would ignore the other
two if they were there, as it happens.)

Each instruction gets encoded in one word of memory. In modern
computers words are in binary, e.g. 32 or 64 bits; but the HAL 100 has
words of 9 characters instead. For example, the assembly language

            ifeq    r1,'X',done

becomes the machine-code word `ifeq 1X34` if `done` happens to be
defined as address `34`. I should maybe apologize for this design;
it's meant to help you follow the execution of self-modifying code
without an intervening layer of interpretation. The IBM 7094 of
Thompson's paper had a fairly similar instruction set, but with many
more instructions, in a conventional binary encoding. If you're
comfortable writing assembly code for another architecture, such as
x86 or ARM, you might prefer targeting that instead.


## Running a program

Besides being a stub for one of the exercises,
[literals_hal.py](literals_hal.py) shows how to run a HAL-100 assembly
program. In a terminal window, enter

    python literals_hal.py

The screen will show the state of the machine before executing each
instruction. Hit the enter key to step forward to the next
instruction. (XXX explain the screen)

If you have an assembly-language program in a file `myprogram.s`, you
can run it the same way with

    python hal_watch.py myprogram.s "my input"

## The instructions

### set

    set dest_register,source_register,constant

is like the C

    dest_register = source_register + constant

In our example

            set     r9,,1

`dest_register` is 9, `source_register` is 0, and `literal` is
1. Register 0 is always treated specially (for all instructions): its
value is 0, and assignments to it have no effect.

Arithmetic on this machine is in decimal, with numbers from 0 to 99. A
register, like a machine word, is a 9-character string; the two
rightmost characters hold the decimal number, while the 7 characters
to the left get filled in from whichever of the addends is nonblank,
if any. The literal can be negative, so to subtract 1 from `r9` you could

            set     r9,r9,-1

It's an error to have non-digits in the number field (except for the
minus sign).

### add

    set dest_register,source_register,constant

is like the C

    dest_register += source_register + constant

except with addition defined as above.

### fetch

    fetch dest_register,address_register,constant

means

    dest_register = memory[address_register + constant]

where the subscript takes the address from the 2 decimal digits of
`address_register + constant`, and, as always, addition is decimal as
above.

### store

    store value_register,address_register,constant

means

    memory[address_register + constant] = value_register

### jump

    jump return_register,address_register,constant

serves for goto, subroutine call, and return. It sets
`return_register` to the address following the current instruction,
then jumps to the address `address_register + constant`. (As always,
if `return_register` is the 0 default, setting it has no effect; so
that'd make a normal goto.) Here's an example call and return, plus a
goto at the start to skip around the subroutine:

          jump ,,after
    sub1  add r1,,-1      ; subtract 1 from r1
          jump ,r9        ; return
    after set r1,,5
          jump r9,,sub1   ; call sub1
          ;; now r1 == 4

### ifeq

This is explained in the example at top. Note that unlike all the
other instructions we've seen so far, the second argument is not a
register number, it's a literal character.

### ifne

Like ifeq, but compare for not-equal instead of for equal.

### getch

    getch dest_register

reads the next character of input, if any, and sets dest_register to
it. On end-of-input it halts immediately, as if with a halt
instruction with a 0 argument. (The Halt exception returned to the 
host environment also carries an argument saying "Out of input".)

### halt

    halt ignored,register,constant

Halt execution, returning `register+constant` to the host environment.
In our exercises, a return value of 0 is taken to mean the input did
not match, while nonzero means it did match.

### noop

Do nothing. (The 5-character machine-code mnemonic for this
instruction is all spaces. But you can write `noop` if you prefer.)
